14.10.25

How does the workflow on the cluster work?
-> two stage tunnel for vscode remote code execution

Do we want our autoregressive process to increase the resolution of the image in every step (like for the visual autoregressive modelling from https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.02905) or do we want to start with the imputed higher resolution input and then autoregressively add detail (higher frequencies)?
-> The second. We want to predict higher SH moments from the lower ones

Where is the data available?
-> At ./mnt/lustre/work/ludwig/shared_datasets/weatherbench2/global
on the cluster
-------------------------------------------------------------
21.10.25

Wind speed is a vector. Or do we just look at its magnitude? If not, what are the variable names?
-> Variable "wind speed" is the magnitude. The vector is split into coordinates wind_speed_u" and "wind_speed_v".
To use these, one could concatenate them in the input.


You load the dataset into RAM in the dataset init, not in the getitem method. 
Is this better, because the dataset is large enough to completely fits into RAM and materializing it in the getitem would slow down the dataloader? Or is it to standardize the data?
-> The loading from disk is pretty slow with constant IO overead,
so doing it once is way faster than calling it many times in getitems.
So this is better, especially because the whole dataset fits into the cluster node RAM.

Why is the function called RealSHT if the output is complex?
In my experiments, the imaginary part was necessary to reconstruct the original data!
How should this be handled?
-> It is called realSHT because it expects the input to be real, which speeds up computation (similar to SVD for symmetric matrices).
The output is complex and must be dealt with in this way. While there is rudimentary complex dtype support in pytorch,
for more complex models (transformer) this might not work. Solution: tensor.view_as_real(), which stacks real and imaginary part along a new dimension.

Have you deviated in any way from the vscode cluster tutorial?
Why does my config not work?
-> Should now finally be fixed (connecting to compute node works)
Still need to figure out how to connect from VSCode

Why is my linear model worse (loss 0.088) than just predicting all zeros (loss 0.046)?
-> Predicting all zeros is not easy, and a linear model is very inadequate for this kind of problem

-------------------------------------------------------------
28.10.25

Can you help me with the
> ImportError: libcudnn.so.9: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory
error when trying to import torch on the cluster?
-> No idea.

When not specifying lmax, mmax in the RealSHT, they are calculated as lmax = nlat and mmax = nlon // 2 + 1.
Because our input has nlon = 2*nlat, the resulting output dimension is lmax = nlat and mmax = nlat + 1.
But the last column is always 0 in my experiments! Can I just cut it such that I can handle the coefficients as a square matrix?
Or better, pass lmax = nlat and mmax = nlat?
-> Passing lmax and mmax such that the output is quadratic appears correct, makes intuitive sense and is what I should do.

Do I even need tokenization?
In a Language transformer, the input is tokenized and pushed through a learned embedding into vectors.
But in our case, we do not have "natural" tokens, but already (complex) numbers as input.
We could view them as real and push them through a linear layer to a higher "embedding" dimension.
Also for the output, we are not constrained to picking tokens, but numbers are completely fine, they are what we want.
Tokenization and subsequent embedding is just a temporary discretization of the input vectors which introduces errors we cannot diminish!
Can we instead train the transformer to directly predict the output instead of logits for the tokens?
-> Yes, we can! We indeed do not strictly need tokenization. But if we directly predict the next coefficients, we have the problem that uncertainty cannot be modelled and predicted, and thus, errors will propagate to the next token. The inference should not be completely determinstic!
Two possible solutions:
Idea 1: Predict a GMM over the next coefficient value.
        Train it via NLL of the actual value given the GMM distribution.
        During inference, sample from it for the next token.
Idea 2: In the forward pass, calculate a prediction multiple (S) times, each time with
        a little bit different noise added at some step.
        This yields an empirical distribution of the prediction based on the S samples. Train with CRPS loss, which measures distance between empirical distribution and true value.
        For inference, this automatically yields multiple samples of the output distribution.
Choose Idea 1 for first implementation.

If we need tokenization:
Would it make sense to pre-train the tokenizer like an autoencoder to maximize the retained information for a given vocab size, instead of a fixed discretization grid?
If so, is the clustering or the (Gumbel-) Autoencoder a good approach?
-> Turns out we don't need tokenization. Answer would be:
Grid discretization would probably be bad (as expected), KMeans is a good approach, but natural idea would be based on quantiles of the coefficient distribution.

Also, tokenization and detokenization is not differentiable, so we cannot use a loss in the coefficients or the original data.
Do I instead use cross entropy loss over predicted token distribution and correct token?
-> Yes, that would be the best approach. But we are not following that.


Is the mask correct the way I designed it?
-> No, given tokens (the ones with index smaller than L) can all attend each other, so the mask has all zeros before that index, not just lower triangular.

-------------------------------------------------------------
04.11.25
